Add loadbalancer documentation (#5555)
pingcap/docs: loadbalancing.md

When your are not using Kubernetes to deploy on a cloud service you can still use the loadbalancing service from your cloud provider.

Another common option is to use a software based loadbalancer. Common ones are ProxySQL, haproxy and MySQL Router.

The last type of loadbalancer that we will discuss here is hardware based loadbalancers. These are physical machines where you plug in a network cable. These are often costly, but also offer a high throughput.

## General loadbalancer requirements for TiDB

Where loadbalancers may offer advanced features like read/write splitting for MySQL, this is not needed for TiDB. The loadbalancer does not need to be able to inspect the MySQL protocol. A TCP level loadbalacer works fine for TiDB.

The loadbalancer only needs access to the TiDB servers (TCP port 4000 by default) and doesn't need access to PD or TiKV servers.

> In general a TCP health check is sufficient. Health checks that check for `read_only` or other MySQL or InnoDB variables should be avoided.

Reviewer: I think a HTTP health check is better along with configuration of `GracefulWaitBeforeShutdown`: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/20649

This helps ensure that topology changes have less impact on users sessions.

Author: I couldn't find this option in the docs, so I opened https://github.com/pingcap/docs/issues/5823

Reviewer: You can also get into the same trouble if it is a duration, since an integer is valid and will be interpreted in nanoseconds :-)

---
title: Loadbalancing
summary: How to use loadbalancing with TiDB
---

# Loadbalancing

Loadbalancing is used to distribute connections from applications to TiDB Server instances. This helps to distribute the load over multiple machines and (depending on the loadbalancing option selected) can automatically re-route connections should a TiDB instance become unavailable.

## Loadbalancing types

The first type of loadbalancing that is available is *connector based loadbalancing*. Many of the MySQL connectors like MySQL Connector/J and MySQL Connector/C++. The benefits from this are that there is no extra network hop and the application has more information about which server it is connected to. The drawback of this is that there is no central administration and when changing the configuration you have to do this on all your application hosts. Depending on the programming language you are using the loadbalancing may not be available or not offer more advanced options. This can work with most third-party applications as this is often configured in the connection string (JDBC url for Java for example).

> It is also possible to use DNS round-robin. However this is not advisable as this won't prevent connections from going to a machine that is unavailable. This means that your application may have to re-try connections more often if not all servers are available.

Reviewer 2: If this is not advisable, then we should not document it here.

Author: As DNS-RR is a common practice I think we should explain here why other solutions are better.

@morgo what's your take on this?

Reviewer: I agree with @dveeden , it's very common and users need to know why we don't recommend it.

Reviewer 2: OK, let's keep it.

If you are using Kubernetes you probably want to use the [LoadBalancer](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb-in-kubernetes/stable/access-tidb#loadbalancer) service type that works with Amazon ELB and similar services from other cloud vendors. For on-premise Kubernetes something like [metallb](https://metallb.universe.tf/) can be used.

When your are not using Kubernetes to deploy on a cloud service you can still use the loadbalancing service from your cloud provider.

Another common option is to use a software based loadbalancer. Common ones are ProxySQL, haproxy and MySQL Router.

The last type of loadbalancing that we will discuss here is hardware based loadbalancers. These are physical machines where you plug in a network cable. These are often costly, but also offer a high throughput.

## General loadbalancing requirements for TiDB

Where loadbalancers may offer advanced features like read/write splitting for MySQL, this is not needed for TiDB. The loadbalancer does not need to be able to inspect the MySQL protocol. A TCP level loadbalacer works fine for TiDB.

> The loadbalancer only needs access to the TiDB servers (TCP port 4000 by default) and doesn't need access to PD or TiKV servers. When using the HTTP status access to TCP port 10080 is also required.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The loadbalancer only needs access to the TiDB servers (TCP port 4000 by default) and doesn't need access to PD or TiKV servers. When using the [status API (TCP port 10080 by default)](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/tidb-monitoring-api#use-the-state-interface) is also required.
```

Reviewer 3: IMO it's better to introduce the hyperlink here since 'HTTP API' may be new to many readers.

In general a TCP health check is sufficient. Health checks that check for `read_only` or other MySQL or InnoDB variables should be avoided.

> Another option is the HTTP status API that is by default available on `http://<ip_of_tidb>:10080/status`. The `graceful-wait-before-shutdown` variable can be used to configure tidb to wait for a number of seconds between starting to shutdown and really closing network connections. In this time the HTTP healthcheck will already fail allowing loadbalancers to start and redirect traffic elsewhere.

Reviewer: I think we can remove this sentence if we use the suggestion above. We should just recommend using this first.

Author: Updated. PTAL

> Health checks that check for `read_only` or other MySQL or InnoDB variables should be avoided.

Reviewer 3: - Is it common to do the health check by accessing system variables?(I know little about this)

- If using system variables like `read_only` is not recommended, it's better to add an explanation here, for example, "because they are [no-op](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/system-variables#tidb_enable_noop_functions-new-in-v40) in TiDB'?"

Author: ProxySQL uses `read_only` to move servers between read and write pools: https://proxysql.com/documentation/backend-monitoring/

[this](https://severalnines.com/resources/database-management-tutorials/mysql-load-balancing-haproxy-tutorial) tutorial from severalnines also has a script that uses `read_only` to check if a master is "healty" or not.

For Galera based clusters [`wsrep_ready`](https://www.percona.com/doc/percona-xtradb-cluster/5.7/wsrep-status-index.html#wsrep_ready) is often used.

Besides this using [`Innodb_buffer_pool_load_status`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/server-status-variables.html#statvar_Innodb_buffer_pool_load_status) is also a common practice to only allow servers to enter a pool once they finished loading the pages that were in the buffer pool before the shutdown. This is to avoid cold caches.

## Where to put your loadbalancer

For software based loadbalancers you have the option to put your loadbalancer on the same hosts as your application or on separate hosts. Both have their own benefits.

Putting the loadbalancer on the same hosts as your application is good for performance as it doesn't need an extra network hop. However having to adminster many instances of your loadbalancing software makes this slightly more complicated to administer.

> Putting the loadbalancer on separate machines may be less performant as it needs an extra network hop and depending on your traffic may become a choke-point. However for administration this is might be easier.

Reviewer: Performant is kind of jargon. It is well understood but I don't think we should use it in docs.

The style-guide is also to s/may/might/ because may has multiple meanings. But I think in this context we could even say something like "will typically increase network latency" because I think it is unequivocal? The edge case would be something weird like a routing error (I also changed it to latency, since there is no guarantee throughput will drop, but it probably will accordingly for many workloads because the protocol is synchronous).

s/machines/hosts/ as physical is not implied, and host is used earlier.

```suggestion
Installing the loadbalancer on separate hosts will typically increase latency as an extra network hop is required. There is also risk that (depending on your network) connectivity to and from the load balancer could become saturated. However, this method is less complicated to administer.
```

> Don't forget to include High-Availablility in your decision. With the first setup an unavailable loadbalancer only impacts a single application host. With the second solution you probably have to take some steps to make your loadbalancer software high-available, which complicates the configuration.

Reviewer: Maybe consider rewriting the above to use ordinal bullet points so the text below makes more sense?

I suggest removing "Don't forget" because it can make the user worry about perils. Both are accepted solutions, so I think we can just say "this should be a factor in your decision".

```suggestion
High availability is also an important consideration when deciding between these options. With the first setup an unavailable loadbalancer only impacts a single application host. With the second solution you probably have to take some steps to make your loadbalancer software high-available, which complicates the configuration.
```

package com.pingcap.tidb_demo_java;

import java.sql.Connection;
import java.sql.DriverManager;
import java.sql.SQLException;
import java.sql.Statement;
import java.sql.ResultSet;

public class App
{
    public static void main( String[] args )
    {
        try {
                Class.forName("com.mysql.cj.jdbc.Driver").newInstance();
        } catch (Exception ex) {
                System.out.println("Failed to load driver: " + ex.getMessage());
        }

        try {
                Connection conn = DriverManager.getConnection("jdbc:mysql:loadbalance://127.0.0.1:4000,127.0.0.1:4001?user=root");
                Statement stmt = conn.createStatement();
                ResultSet rs = stmt.executeQuery("SELECT @@hostname, @@port");
                rs.next();
                System.out.println(rs.getString("@@hostname") + ":" + rs.getString("@@port"));
        } catch (SQLException ex) {
                System.out.println("SQLException: " + ex.getMessage());
        }
    }
}
```

See [Best Practices for Developing Java Applications with TiDB](/best-practices/java-app-best-practices.md) for more details about how to use TiDB with Java Applications.

### MySQL Connector/Python

> In this example I use MySQL Connector/Python 8.0.24 (`mysql-connector-python==8.0.24` according to `pip freeze` output).

Reviewer 3: IMHO It's better to avoid the first-person pronoun "I" in this document. Could you use the passive voice here like:

"In this example MySQL Connector/Python 8.0.24 (`mysql-connector-python==8.0.24` according to `pip freeze` output) are used."

### Automation 

To automate operations like adding or removing instances you may want to use the [TiDB HTTP API](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/blob/master/docs/tidb_http_api.md).

If you do this you may want to filter based on the labels of the servers in case not all servers should be put in your loadbalancer pool.

```
$ curl -s http://127.0.0.1:10080/info/all | jq '.all_servers_info'
{
  "431ccb25-24a6-4311-b48d-613cac401b22": {
    "version": "5.7.25-TiDB-v5.0.1",
    "git_hash": "1145e347d3469d8e89f88dce86f6926ca44b3cd8",
    "ddl_id": "431ccb25-24a6-4311-b48d-613cac401b22",
    "ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "listening_port": 4000,
    "status_port": 10080,
    "lease": "45s",
    "binlog_status": "Off",
    "start_timestamp": 1620024407,
    "labels": {},
    "server_id": 0
  },
  "b830f979-c277-4e47-934e-87bb2063cf4d": {
    "version": "5.7.25-TiDB-v5.0.1",
    "git_hash": "1145e347d3469d8e89f88dce86f6926ca44b3cd8",
    "ddl_id": "b830f979-c277-4e47-934e-87bb2063cf4d",
    "ip": "127.0.0.1",
    "listening_port": 4001,
    "status_port": 10081,
    "lease": "45s",
    "binlog_status": "Off",
    "start_timestamp": 1620024407,
    "labels": {},
    "server_id": 0
  }
}

> ```

Author: markdownlint doesn't seem to allow that.
